---
title: Productive Procrastination
date: June 21, 2018
---

In college I wrote occasional articles for the arts section of the
student newspaper. Once I was assigned to interview a visiting poet
who had recently had his first collection of poetry published by
McSweeney's. I learned the story of how he had written the collection
and how it had come to be published only after I'd already read and
enjoyed the poems, and it surprised and stuck with me.

At the time he was about to finish a bachelor's degree in mechanical
engineering, and he explained that he'd written most of the poems on
his iPhone as a form of "productive procrastination" -- work that he
allowed himself to do when he wasn't doing his school work. He kept a
list of such tasks, and when he felt the urge to procrastinate on his
work he'd switch to one of them.

He'd take the poems to show a poetry professor. He'd taken one class
with this professor early on in his time at the university, and then
they continued to meet for private tutoring sessions. Unbeknownst to
the poet, the professor collected the poems into a manuscript and
submitted it to a contest for publication. It wasn't until McSweeney's
contacted the poet to tell him that he'd won that he found out what
the professor had done.

I like this story partly because of the elements of coincidence,
accident and serendipity, but also because it gestures towards the
possibility that many small moments can add up to something larger and
lasting. There is no substitute for putting in the time to do the work
you love, but maybe that work does not have to be all-encompassing --
you don't always have to give up everything else to create something
meaningful. Sometimes it can fit alongside the rest of your life, and
perhaps even be better for it.
